chapters/data-formats.adoc, before:

[[data-formats]] 
= Data formats


[#167]
== {MUST} use JSON as payload data interchange format

Use JSON ({RFC-7159}[RFC 7159]) to represent structured (resource) data 
passed with HTTP requests and responses as body payload.
The JSON payload must use a JSON object as top-level data 
structure (if possible) to allow for future extension. This also applies to
collection resources, where you ad-hoc would use an array -- see also
<<110>>.

Additionally, the JSON payload must comply to the more restrictive Internet JSON ({RFC-7493}[RFC 7493]),
particularly

* {RFC-7493}#section-2.1[Section 2.1] on encoding of characters, and
* {RFC-7493}#section-2.3[Section 2.3] on object constraints.

As a consequence, a JSON payload must

* use {RFC-7493}#section-2.1[`UTF-8` encoding]
* consist of {RFC-7493}#section-2.1[valid Unicode strings], i.e. must not
  contain non-characters or surrogates, and
* contain only {RFC-7493}#section-2.3[unique member names] (no duplicate
  names).


[#168]
== {MAY} pass non-JSON media types using data specific standard formats

Non-JSON media types may be supported, if you stick to a business object specific standard 
format for the payload data, for instance, image data format (JPG, PNG, GIF), document 
format (PDF, DOC, ODF, PPT), or archive format (TAR, ZIP). 

Generic structured data interchange formats other than JSON (e.g. XML, CSV) 
may be provided, but only additionally to JSON as default format using content negotiation, 
for specific use cases where clients may not interpret the payload structure.


[#172]
== {SHOULD} use standard media types

You should use standard media types (defined in {media-types}[media type registry] 
of Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA)) as `content-type` (or `accept`) header 
information. More specifically, for JSON payload you should use the standard media type 
`application/json` (or `application/problem+json` for <<176>>).

You should avoid using custom media types like `application/x.zalando.article+json`. 
Custom media types beginning with `x` bring no advantage compared to the
standard media type for JSON, and make automated processing more difficult.

*Exception:* Custom media type should be only used in situations where you need to provide 
<<114, API endpoint versioning>> (with content negotiation) due to incompatible changes.   


[#238]
== {MUST} use standard data formats

https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/blob/master/versions/3.0.2.md#data-types[Open API] 
(based on https://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/reference/string.html#format[JSON Schema])
defines formats from ISO and IETFF standards for date/time, integers/numbers and binary data.
You *must* use these formats, whenever applicable:

[cols="10%,10%,40%,40%",options="header",]
|=====================================================================
| `OpenAPI type` | `OpenAPI format` | Specification | Example
| `integer` | `int32` | 4 byte signed integer between pass:[-2<sup>31</sup>] and pass:[2<sup>31</sup>]-1 | `7721071004`
| `integer` | `int64` | 8 byte signed integer between pass:[-2<sup>63</sup>] and pass:[2<sup>63</sup>]-1 | `772107100456824`
| `integer` | `bigint` | arbitrarily large signed integer number | `77210710045682438959`
| `number` | `float` | `binary32` single precision decimal number -- see {IEEE-754-2008}[IEEE 754-2008/ISO 60559:2011] | `3.1415927`
| `number` | `double` | `binary64` double precision decimal number -- see {IEEE-754-2008}[IEEE 754-2008/ISO 60559:2011] | `3.141592653589793`
| `number` | `decimal` | arbitrarily precise signed decimal number | `3.141592653589793238462643383279`
| `string` | `byte` | `base64url` encoded byte following {RFC-7493}#section-4.4[RFC 7493 Section 4.4] | `"VA=="`
| `string` | `binary` | `base64url` encoded byte sequence following {RFC-7493}#section-4.4[RFC 7493 Section 4.4]  | `"VGVzdA=="`
| `string` | `date` | {RFC-3339}[RFC 3339] internet profile -- subset of https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3339#ref-ISO8601[ISO 8601] | `"2019-07-30"`
| `string` | `date-time` | {RFC-3339}[RFC 3339] internet profile -- subset of https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3339#ref-ISO8601[ISO 8601] |`"2019-07-30T06:43:40.252Z"`
| `string` | `time` | {RFC-3339}[RFC 3339] internet profile -- subset of https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3339#ref-ISO8601[ISO 8601] | `"06:43:40.252Z"`
| `string` | `password` |  | `"secret"`
|=====================================================================

*Note:* Formats `bigint`, `decimal` and `time` have been added to the OpenAPI defined formats --
see also <<171>> and <<169>> below. 

We add further OpenAPI formats that are useful especially in an e-commerce environment 
e.g. `language code`, `country code`, `currency`, `email` based other ISO and IETFF standards.
You *must* use these formats, whenever applicable:

[cols="10%,10%,40%,40%",options="header",]
|=====================================================================
| `OpenAPI type` | `format` | Specification | Example
| `string` | `iso-639` | two letter language code -- see {ISO-639-1}[ISO 639-1] | `"en"`
| `string` | `bcp47` | multi letter language tag -- see {BCP47}[BCP 47]. It is a compatible extension of {ISO-639-1}[ISO 639-1] optionally with additional information for language usage, like region, variant, script. | `"en-DE"`
| `string` | `iso-3166` | two letter country code -- see {ISO-3166-1-a2}[ISO 3166-1 alpha-2] | `"GB"`  *Hint:* It is `"GB"`, not `"UK"`, even though `"UK"` has seen some use at Zalando.
| `string` | `iso-4217` | three letter currency code -- see {ISO-4217}[ISO 4217] | `"EUR"`
| `string` | `gtin-13` | Global Trade Item Number -- see {GTIN}[GTIN] | `"5710798389878"`
| `string` | `email` | {RFC-5322}[RFC 5322] | `"example@zalando.de"`
| `string` | `hostname` | {RFC-1034}[RFC 1034] | `"www.zalando.de"`
| `string` | `ipv4` | {RFC-2673}[RFC 2673] | `"104.75.173.179"`
| `string` | `ipv6` | {RFC-2673}[RFC 2673] | `"2600:1401:2::8a"`
| `string` | `uri` | {RFC-3986}[RFC 3986] | `"https://www.zalando.de/"`
| `string` | `uri-template` | {RFC-6570}[RFC 6570] | `"/users/\{id\}"`
| `string` | <<144, `uuid`>> | {RFC-4122}[RFC 4122] | `"e2ab873e-b295-11e9-9c02-..."`
| `string` | `json-pointer` | {RFC-6901}[RFC 6901] | `"/items/0/id"`
| `string` | `regex` | regular expressions as defined in {ECMA-262}[ECMA 262] | `"^[a-z0-9]+$"`
|=====================================================================

*Remark:* Please note that this list of standard data formats is not exhaustive 
and everyone is encouraged to propose additions.


[#171]
== {MUST} define a format for number and integer types

In <<238>> we added `bigint` and `decimal` to the OpenAPI defined formats. 
As an implication, you must always provide one of the formats `int32`, `int64`, `bigint` 
or `float`, `double`, `decimal` when you define an API property of 
JSON type `number` or `integer`. 

By this we prevent clients from guessing the precision incorrectly, and thereby 
changing the value unintentionally. The precision must be translated by clients 
and servers into the most specific language types; in Java, for instance, the `number` 
type with `decimal` format will translate into `BigDecimal` and `integer` type with 
`int32` format will translate to `int` or `Integer` Java types.


[#239]
=== {MUST} encode binary data in `base64url`

You may expose binary data. You must use a standard media type and data format, 
if applicable -- see <<168, Rule 168>>. If no standard is available, you must define 
the binary data as `string` typed property with `binary` format using `base64url`
encoding -- as also described in <<238>>.


[#126]
[#169]
== {MUST} use standard formats for date and time properties

As a specific case of <<238>>, you must use the `string` typed formats 
`date`, `date-time` or `time` for the definition of date and time properties. 
The formats are based on the standard {RFC-3339}[RFC 3339] internet profile -- a 
subset of https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3339#ref-ISO8601[ISO 8601]

*Exception:* For passing date/time information via standard protocol headers,
HTTP https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7231#section-7.1.1.1[RFC 7231] requires to 
follow the date and time specification used by the Internet Message Format 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5322[RFC 5322]. 

As defined by the standard, time zone offset may be used, however, we recommend 
to only use times based on UTC without local offsets. For example `2015-05-28T14:07:17Z` 
rather than `2015-05-28T14:07:17+00:00`. From experience we have learned that zone 
offsets are not easy to understand and often not correctly handled. Note also that
zone offsets are different from local times which may include daylight saving time. 
When it comes to storage, all dates should be consistently stored in UTC without 
a zone offset. Localization should be done locally by the services that provide 
user interfaces, if required.

*Hint:* We discourage using numerical timestamps. It typically creates 
issues with precision, e.g. whether to represent a timestamp as 1460062925, 
1460062925000 or 1460062925.000. Date strings, though more verbose and requiring 
more effort to parse, avoid this ambiguity.


[#127]
== {SHOULD} use standard formats for time duration and interval properties

Schema based JSON properties that are by design durations and intervals could
be strings formatted as defined by {ISO-8601}[ISO 8601]
({RFC-3339}#appendix-A[Appendix A of RFC 3339 contains a grammar] for durations).


[#128]
[#170]
== {MUST} use standard formats for country, language and currency properties

As a specific case of <<238>> you must use the following standard formats:

* Country codes: {ISO-3166-1-a2}[ISO 3166-1-alpha2] two letter country codes
  indicated via OpenAPI format `iso-3166`
* Language codes: {ISO-639-1}[ISO 639-1] two letter language codes
  indicated via OpenAPI format `iso-639`
* Language variant tags: {BCP47}[BCP 47] multi letter language tag
  indicated via OpenAPI format `bcp47`. (It is a compatible extension of 
  {ISO-639-1}[ISO 639-1] with additional optional 
  information for language usage, like region, variant, script)
* Currency codes:  {ISO-4217}[ISO 4217] three letter currency codes
   indicated via OpenAPI format `iso-4217`

Commit message:

Added 'localized-string' format to OAS3 formats.

chapters/data-formats.adoc, after:

[[data-formats]] 
= Data formats


[#167]
== {MUST} use JSON as payload data interchange format

Use JSON ({RFC-7159}[RFC 7159]) to represent structured (resource) data 
passed with HTTP requests and responses as body payload.
The JSON payload must use a JSON object as top-level data 
structure (if possible) to allow for future extension. This also applies to
collection resources, where you ad-hoc would use an array -- see also
<<110>>.

Additionally, the JSON payload must comply to the more restrictive Internet JSON ({RFC-7493}[RFC 7493]),
particularly

* {RFC-7493}#section-2.1[Section 2.1] on encoding of characters, and
* {RFC-7493}#section-2.3[Section 2.3] on object constraints.

As a consequence, a JSON payload must

* use {RFC-7493}#section-2.1[`UTF-8` encoding]
* consist of {RFC-7493}#section-2.1[valid Unicode strings], i.e. must not
  contain non-characters or surrogates, and
* contain only {RFC-7493}#section-2.3[unique member names] (no duplicate
  names).


[#168]
== {MAY} pass non-JSON media types using data specific standard formats

Non-JSON media types may be supported, if you stick to a business object specific standard 
format for the payload data, for instance, image data format (JPG, PNG, GIF), document 
format (PDF, DOC, ODF, PPT), or archive format (TAR, ZIP). 

Generic structured data interchange formats other than JSON (e.g. XML, CSV) 
may be provided, but only additionally to JSON as default format using content negotiation, 
for specific use cases where clients may not interpret the payload structure.


[#172]
== {SHOULD} use standard media types

You should use standard media types (defined in {media-types}[media type registry] 
of Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA)) as `content-type` (or `accept`) header 
information. More specifically, for JSON payload you should use the standard media type 
`application/json` (or `application/problem+json` for <<176>>).

You should avoid using custom media types like `application/x.zalando.article+json`. 
Custom media types beginning with `x` bring no advantage compared to the
standard media type for JSON, and make automated processing more difficult.

*Exception:* Custom media type should be only used in situations where you need to provide 
<<114, API endpoint versioning>> (with content negotiation) due to incompatible changes.   


[#238]
== {MUST} use standard data formats

https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/blob/master/versions/3.0.2.md#data-types[Open API] 
(based on https://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/reference/string.html#format[JSON Schema])
defines formats from ISO and IETFF standards for date/time, integers/numbers and binary data.
You *must* use these formats, whenever applicable:

[cols="10%,10%,40%,40%",options="header",]
|=====================================================================
| `OpenAPI type` | `OpenAPI format` | Specification | Example
| `integer` | `int32` | 4 byte signed integer between pass:[-2<sup>31</sup>] and pass:[2<sup>31</sup>]-1 | `7721071004`
| `integer` | `int64` | 8 byte signed integer between pass:[-2<sup>63</sup>] and pass:[2<sup>63</sup>]-1 | `772107100456824`
| `integer` | `bigint` | arbitrarily large signed integer number | `77210710045682438959`
| `number` | `float` | `binary32` single precision decimal number -- see {IEEE-754-2008}[IEEE 754-2008/ISO 60559:2011] | `3.1415927`
| `number` | `double` | `binary64` double precision decimal number -- see {IEEE-754-2008}[IEEE 754-2008/ISO 60559:2011] | `3.141592653589793`
| `number` | `decimal` | arbitrarily precise signed decimal number | `3.141592653589793238462643383279`
| `string` | `byte` | `base64url` encoded byte following {RFC-7493}#section-4.4[RFC 7493 Section 4.4] | `"VA=="`
| `string` | `binary` | `base64url` encoded byte sequence following {RFC-7493}#section-4.4[RFC 7493 Section 4.4]  | `"VGVzdA=="`
| `string` | `date` | {RFC-3339}[RFC 3339] internet profile -- subset of https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3339#ref-ISO8601[ISO 8601] | `"2019-07-30"`
| `string` | `date-time` | {RFC-3339}[RFC 3339] internet profile -- subset of https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3339#ref-ISO8601[ISO 8601] |`"2019-07-30T06:43:40.252Z"`
| `string` | `time` | {RFC-3339}[RFC 3339] internet profile -- subset of https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3339#ref-ISO8601[ISO 8601] | `"06:43:40.252Z"`
| `string` | `password` |  | `"secret"`
|=====================================================================

*Note:* Formats `bigint`, `decimal` and `time` have been added to the OpenAPI defined formats --
see also <<171>> and <<169>> below. 

We add further OpenAPI formats that are useful especially in an e-commerce environment 
e.g. `language code`, `country code`, `currency`, `email` based other ISO and IETFF standards.
You *must* use these formats, whenever applicable:

[cols="10%,10%,40%,40%",options="header",]
|=====================================================================
| `OpenAPI type` | `format` | Specification | Example
| `string` | `iso-639` | two letter language code -- see {ISO-639-1}[ISO 639-1] | `"en"`
| `string` | `bcp47` | multi letter language tag -- see {BCP47}[BCP 47]. It is a compatible extension of {ISO-639-1}[ISO 639-1] optionally with additional information for language usage, like region, variant, script. | `"en-DE"`
| `string` | `iso-3166` | two letter country code -- see {ISO-3166-1-a2}[ISO 3166-1 alpha-2] | `"GB"`  *Hint:* It is `"GB"`, not `"UK"`, even though `"UK"` has seen some use at Zalando.
| `string` | `iso-4217` | three letter currency code -- see {ISO-4217}[ISO 4217] | `"EUR"`
| `string` | `gtin-13` | Global Trade Item Number -- see {GTIN}[GTIN] | `"5710798389878"`
| `string` | `email` | {RFC-5322}[RFC 5322] | `"example@zalando.de"`
| `string` | `hostname` | {RFC-1034}[RFC 1034] | `"www.zalando.de"`
| `string` | `ipv4` | {RFC-2673}[RFC 2673] | `"104.75.173.179"`
| `string` | `ipv6` | {RFC-2673}[RFC 2673] | `"2600:1401:2::8a"`
| `string` | `uri` | {RFC-3986}[RFC 3986] | `"https://www.zalando.de/"`
| `string` | `uri-template` | {RFC-6570}[RFC 6570] | `"/users/\{id\}"`
| `string` | <<144, `uuid`>> | {RFC-4122}[RFC 4122] | `"e2ab873e-b295-11e9-9c02-..."`
| `string` | `json-pointer` | {RFC-6901}[RFC 6901] | `"/items/0/id"`
| `string` | `regex` | regular expressions as defined in {ECMA-262}[ECMA 262] | `"^[a-z0-9]+$"`
| `string` | `localized-string` | A string which is localized in the requested language | `"Fällige Wartungen"`
|=====================================================================

*Remark:* Please note that this list of standard data formats is not exhaustive 
and everyone is encouraged to propose additions.


[#171]
== {MUST} define a format for number and integer types

In <<238>> we added `bigint` and `decimal` to the OpenAPI defined formats. 
As an implication, you must always provide one of the formats `int32`, `int64`, `bigint` 
or `float`, `double`, `decimal` when you define an API property of 
JSON type `number` or `integer`. 

By this we prevent clients from guessing the precision incorrectly, and thereby 
changing the value unintentionally. The precision must be translated by clients 
and servers into the most specific language types; in Java, for instance, the `number` 
type with `decimal` format will translate into `BigDecimal` and `integer` type with 
`int32` format will translate to `int` or `Integer` Java types.


[#239]
=== {MUST} encode binary data in `base64url`

You may expose binary data. You must use a standard media type and data format, 
if applicable -- see <<168, Rule 168>>. If no standard is available, you must define 
the binary data as `string` typed property with `binary` format using `base64url`
encoding -- as also described in <<238>>.


[#126]
[#169]
== {MUST} use standard formats for date and time properties

As a specific case of <<238>>, you must use the `string` typed formats 
`date`, `date-time` or `time` for the definition of date and time properties. 
The formats are based on the standard {RFC-3339}[RFC 3339] internet profile -- a 
subset of https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3339#ref-ISO8601[ISO 8601]

*Exception:* For passing date/time information via standard protocol headers,
HTTP https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7231#section-7.1.1.1[RFC 7231] requires to 
follow the date and time specification used by the Internet Message Format 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5322[RFC 5322]. 

As defined by the standard, time zone offset may be used, however, we recommend 
to only use times based on UTC without local offsets. For example `2015-05-28T14:07:17Z` 
rather than `2015-05-28T14:07:17+00:00`. From experience we have learned that zone 
offsets are not easy to understand and often not correctly handled. Note also that
zone offsets are different from local times which may include daylight saving time. 
When it comes to storage, all dates should be consistently stored in UTC without 
a zone offset. Localization should be done locally by the services that provide 
user interfaces, if required.

*Hint:* We discourage using numerical timestamps. It typically creates 
issues with precision, e.g. whether to represent a timestamp as 1460062925, 
1460062925000 or 1460062925.000. Date strings, though more verbose and requiring 
more effort to parse, avoid this ambiguity.


[#127]
== {SHOULD} use standard formats for time duration and interval properties

Schema based JSON properties that are by design durations and intervals could
be strings formatted as defined by {ISO-8601}[ISO 8601]
({RFC-3339}#appendix-A[Appendix A of RFC 3339 contains a grammar] for durations).


[#128]
[#170]
== {MUST} use standard formats for country, language and currency properties

As a specific case of <<238>> you must use the following standard formats:

* Country codes: {ISO-3166-1-a2}[ISO 3166-1-alpha2] two letter country codes
  indicated via OpenAPI format `iso-3166`
* Language codes: {ISO-639-1}[ISO 639-1] two letter language codes
  indicated via OpenAPI format `iso-639`
* Language variant tags: {BCP47}[BCP 47] multi letter language tag
  indicated via OpenAPI format `bcp47`. (It is a compatible extension of 
  {ISO-639-1}[ISO 639-1] with additional optional 
  information for language usage, like region, variant, script)
* Currency codes:  {ISO-4217}[ISO 4217] three letter currency codes
   indicated via OpenAPI format `iso-4217`
